{section: mainmatter, sample: true}
# You Can't Solve Learning
You know the biggest problem I have at the gym? Like most humans, I kind of instinctively aim for a more-efficient solution to things. So when my trainer tells me to pick up a few hundred pounds and carry it across the room, I look for a hand truck. Wheels, man. Wheels.

Almost every part of human endeavor is filled with us trying to prevent problems. It's not surprising, given our hardwired fear of failure. Our brains' experience of loss or failure is three times more intense than our experience of gain or success; "a bird in hand is worth two in the bush" is wired right into our DNA, it seems. We dislike failure so much that we try to mitigate and prevent it at every turn.

Consider the employee manual at your job. It's literally chock-full of attempts to pre-solve for problems that have happened in the past. The earliest companies didn't need a manual that told people how to dress or when to be at work, but eventually that became a problem, and so manuals were created to try and prevent those problems. And in most cases, those manuals never 100% prevent the problems they were trying to solve; they just represent a legal defense for firing someone who continued to cause the problems. Municipal ordinances, laws, rules — they're all about trying to pre-solve for a problem. Even the United States Constitution's Bill of Rights is basically a preemptive strike on problems that its authors had experienced and wanted to prevent going forward.

The problem is that people don't _learn_ that way. Human beings are simply not wired to ingest a bunch of abstract information and have it suddenly behave who they are and how they behave. Take yourself, or any human, at a very young age: parents tell their kids not to touch the hot pot on the stove, and the kid, at some point, almost inevitably does so. Failing is how we learn.

This is, in fact, the great conundrum of learning. As children, we're relatively less afraid of failure than adults. That's because we haven't learned the downsides of failure, like getting burned by that damn pot. As we grow older, we start to fear failure more and more, because we have a growing lifetime of experience that has proven how painful failure can be. But if we're afraid to fail, and failure is the only way we can learn, then how can we still learn? It's a challenge. Much ink has been spilled over the decades about how adult education is different from child education, and it really all comes down to allaying fear. "Never ask a question of the room and then point at one learner to answer it," I was taught as a new technical trainer, because adults are afraid of "being called on." Adults don't like to look stupid in front of other adults, so they'll often stay quiet, not experiment, and not be as engaged in the class. 

Here's one way that "unintentional" instructional designers — people with a life of learning behind them, who find themselves suddenly needing to teach other people — will go wrong. They'll *front-load*. A knowledgeable adult will often break down the task that they're trying to teach, and then reverse-engineer their own learning experience. They'll helpfully try to anticipate every problem they ran into, and construct a narrative that eliminates any chance of those problems happening to the learner. They try to _prevent failure_ through what I call "engineered learning." But it doesn't work. That approach just hand-feeds information to someone, without creating strong neural connections that relate to real-world needs and outcomes. Without failure, or at least a dumbed-down failure, learning isn't effective. It's a bit like a vaccine: you can't develop an immunity to a virus without personally experiencing the virus, but that would make you sick. So vaccines (often) contain a synthetic or weakened version of the virus, giving your system a chance to "fail" in a lightweight fashion and develop the immunity you need. Learning needs to be like that: a _vaccine_ against failure, but not a _prevention_ of failure.

"Unintentional" instructional designers will also try to front-load concepts a lot of the time. "In order to teach you to drive a car, I first need to cover all the rules of the road." That's not _exactly_ the best way to learn, though, because of — as we shall explore in this book — the way our brains construct memories and learning. We don't often learn abstract concepts easily, except through rote memorization, which takes longer. We tend to learn — as happens when we fail — by experiencing a problem and then being offered a solution. I'm not suggesting popping the kids behind the wheel and releasing them into the world to see what happens, of course, but you can _simulate_ problem scenarios, just as a vaccine _simulates_ a virus. For example, show some kids a diagram of a four-way intersection with a car heading each way. Ask, "who gets to go first? How do we make sure nobody crashes?" Let the kids verbally explore their own solutions, and discuss why each might or might not work. If they don't come up with the right answers, meaning _they've failed_, then you can start nudging them toward the right one. By that point, their brains' survival mechanisms will have engaged in an active search for the solution that will prevent a crash, and the eventual correct answer will be more meaningful. The duration of time this experience takes will create more neural "weight" in their brains, and create a memory that, when they encounter that intersection in the real world, will be more relevant and readily accessible.

The problem with this is that _learning takes time_, which is something not all of us are willing to invest. You can _reduce_ that time compared to real-world trial-and-error, but you can only reduce it so much. Our brains still need to experience failure, even in proxy form, before a solution will "stick." And we can only learn so much in a given period of time. Learning isn't efficient, and it isn't a problem you can _solve_; it's a process you must _experience_. 

And that's what instructional design is all about. It's about understanding the basic cognitive science in how our brains learn, and using that to construct the most efficient learning process _that will still create learning_. It's about understanding the limits of the human brain's ability to effectively absorb new information, and the tricks you can use to make the brain _want_ that information. It's about how to get the brain to take new, abstract knowledge, and turn that into practical, real-world application. 

And all of *that* is what this book is all about.